Update Rust maintenance steps (#354)
ubuntu/ubuntu-project-docs: docs/maintainers/niche-package-maintenance/rustc/update-rust.md

```

You are now free to restore `debian/copyright` to its original state, un-commenting the `vendor` line in `Files-Excluded`:

```none
$ git restore debian/copyright
```

> Since this particular tarball contains all vendored dependencies and will therefore be different from the final tarball, it should be renamed with an `~old` suffix, like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this particular tarball contains all vendored dependencies and is therefore different from the final tarball, it should be renamed with an `~old` suffix, like so:
```

```none
$ mv ../rustc-<X.Y>_<X.Y.Z>+dfsg{1,~old}.orig.tar.xz
```

(updating-rust-updating-the-source-code-in-your-repository)=

> #### Updating the source code in your repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion

(updating-rust-updating-the-source-code-in-your-repository)=
#### Updating the source code in your repository
```

Remember, your goal here is to preserve the _intent_ of the patch. If, for example, a patch disables certain tests which require an internet connection, and those tests get refactored completely, it's your responsibility to track down the tests which require an internet connection and disable them accordingly.

(updating-rust-pruning-unwanted-dependencies)=

> ### Pruning Unwanted Dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion

(updating-rust-pruning-unwanted-dependencies)=
### Pruning Unwanted Dependencies
```

#### Generating the pruned vendor tarball component

In addition to the standard orig tarball containing all the upstream code, the Rust toolchain Ubuntu package also comes with an additional {term}`orig tarball` component called `vendor`. This tarball component contains _just_ the pruned vendored dependencies of the Rust toolchain.

[`cargo-vendor-filterer`](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-vendor-filterer/) is used to generate a pruned vendor directory. It's recommended to download the `rustup` snap, use `rustup` to download the toolchain matching your target version, then install `cargo-vendor-filterer` for that Rust installation:

```none
# snap install rustup
$ rustup install <X.Y.Z>
$ cargo +<X.Y.Z> install cargo-vendor-filterer
```

Make sure that `~/.cargo/bin` is in your `$PATH`, otherwise you won't be able to run `cargo-vendor-filterer`.

(updating-rust-vendor-tarball-rule)=

> After that, call the `vendor-tarball` rule in `debian/rules`. This will use `cargo-vendor-filterer` to generate a vendor directory which _only_ contains the dependencies required by supported Ubuntu targets. It then repacks this directory into the `vendor` tarball component. Make sure you point it to your installed Rust toolchain via `RUST_BOOTSTRAP_DIR`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, call the `vendor-tarball` rule in `debian/rules`. This uses `cargo-vendor-filterer` to generate a vendor directory that _only_ contains the dependencies required by supported Ubuntu targets. It then repacks this directory into the `vendor` tarball component. Make sure you point it to your installed Rust toolchain via `RUST_BOOTSTRAP_DIR`:
```

To recap, your parent directory should contain the following:

- `rustc-<X.Y>_<X.Y.Z>+dfsg~old.orig.tar.xz`: The original upstream source code tarball with an unpruned vendor directory.
- `rustc-<X.Y>_<X.Y.Z>+dfsg.orig-vendor.tar.xz`: The pruned vendor directory.

You must now update the orig tarball and unpacked source tree to match your pruned files.

#### Updating the orig tarball

First, double-check your `debian/copyright` to ensure that `vendor` is listed under `Files-Excluded` (but _NOT_ `Files-Excluded-vendor`). You can now generate a new orig tarball without a `vendor` directory, since the vendor tarball component provides that directory:

```none
$ uscan --download-version <X.Y.Z> -v 2>&1 | tee <path_to_log_output>
```

This is the version we will be using for the final package upload. Therefore, we shall rename it to the standard orig tarball format:

```none
$ mv ../rustc-<X.Y>_<X.Y.Z>+dfsg{1,}.orig.tar.xz
```

#### The source tree update

To keep the Git tree clean, we must rebase all our changes on top of the newly-pruned orig tarballs.

First, make a backup just to be safe:

```none
$ git branch backup

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Make a backup just to be safe:

   ```none
   $ git branch backup
   ```
````

Next, return to the previous Rust version and create a new branch to import the updated tarballs:

```none
$ git checkout merge-<X.Y_old>
$ git checkout -b import-new-<X.Y>
```

The version string in `debian/changelog` must match the names of the tarballs we generated. Consult `git log merge-<X.Y>` and cherry-pick the commit where you added the changelog entry for `<X.Y>`:

```none
$ git cherry-pick <commit_where_new_changelog_entry_was_added>

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

$ git branch experimental

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
4. Recreate the `experimental` branch:

   ```none
   $ git branch -D experimental
   $ git branch experimental
   ```
````

Then, we can merge our newly-pruned tarballs onto the previous Rust version's source cleanly. Note the added `component` argument pointing `gbp` to the vendor tarball component.

```none
$ gbp import-orig \
    --no-symlink-orig \
    --no-pristine-tar \
    --upstream-branch=experimental \
    --debian-branch=import-new-<X.Y> \
    --component=vendor \
    ../rustc-<X.Y>_<X.Y.Z>+dfsg.orig.tar.xz
```

Finally, we can switch back to our actual branch and rebase:

```none
$ git checkout merge-<X.Y>
$ git rebase -i import-new-<X.Y>

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
   $ git rebase -i import-new-<X.Y>
   ```
````

When consulting the list of Git rebase commands, don't forget to drop the commit in which you imported the old version of the tarball. Example for `rustc-1.91`:

```none
drop 0759faf6707 New upstream version 1.91.1+dfsg~old
pick 85d8e6af63d Refresh d-0000-ignore-removed-submodules.patch
pick f31152ca1b9 Refresh d-0010-cargo-remove-vendored-c-crates.patch
[...]

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   When consulting the list of Git rebase commands, don't forget to drop the commit in which you imported the old version of the tarball. Example for `rustc-1.91`:

   ```none
   drop 0759faf6707 New upstream version 1.91.1+dfsg~old
   pick 85d8e6af63d Refresh d-0000-ignore-removed-submodules.patch
   pick f31152ca1b9 Refresh d-0010-cargo-remove-vendored-c-crates.patch
   [...]
   ```
```

Consulting your `git log`, you should see the two new `gbp` commits immediately after the creation of the `<X.Y>` changelog entry.

> #### Verifying your changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Verifying your changes
```

`update-version`, in `debian/rules`, updates all relevant control files automatically. In order to run it, it must be given an up-to-date Rust toolchain via `RUST_BOOTSTRAP_DIR`:

```none
$ RUST_BOOTSTRAP_DIR=~/.rustup/toolchains/<X.Y.Z>-x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/bin/rustc \
    debian/rules update-version
```

After running the script, consult `git diff` and verify that, in `debian/control`, the two `Build-Depends` options for a bootstrapping compiler are `rustc-<X.Y_old>` and `rustc-<X.Y>`.

After checking that the changes are correct, you may commit these changes and continue.

### After-Repack Patch Refreshes

Some of the patches will no longer apply now that more files have been removed. You must refresh all the patches so they once again apply cleanly onto the newly-pruned source.

In general, you will follow the same protocol as the [initial patch refresh](updating-rust-initial-patch-refresh). The most common change is dropping patches of pruned vendored files.

### Updating XS-Vendored-Sources-Rust

> Inside of `debian/control`, there's a special field called `XS-Vendored-Sources-Rust` which must be updated. It simply lists all the vendored crate dependencies, along with their version numbers, on a single line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside of `debian/control`, there's a special field called `XS-Vendored-Sources-Rust`, which must be updated. It lists all the vendored crate dependencies, along with their version numbers, on a single line.
```

$ CARGO_VENDOR_DIR=vendor/ /usr/share/cargo/bin/dh-cargo-vendored-sources
```

Replace the existing `XS-Vendored-Sources-Rust` field in `debian/control` with this new expected value.

:::{attention}
Make sure there's still an empty line after the end of the field! Mistakenly dropping the empty line will result in a build failure right at the end of the test build.
:::

This is another opportunity to verify that you pruned unwanted crates properly. You shouldn't see any of the pruned Windows crates in the new `XS-Vendored-Sources-Rust` field.

:::{note}
If you're running a pre-versioned Rust Ubuntu release, then there's a decent chance the `cargo` installation required by `dh-cargo` will be too old. In this case, don't use `dh-cargo`—instead, manually download [`dh-cargo-vendored-sources`](https://git.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/dh-cargo/tree/dh-cargo-vendored-sources) (it's just a Perl script) and use it _without_ deb-based installations of Rust, which ensures that the `rustup` snap's version will be used instead.
:::

> ### Updating Vendored Copyright Overrides

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Updating vendored copyright overrides
```

`debian/copyright` contains copyright stanzas for all the vendored dependencies of `rustc`. However, the crate stubs are "red herrings" for the purposes of `debian/copyright`. They're just empty crates; they don't contain any copyrighted code.

To prevent packaging tools from complaining that the stubbed crates are missing copyright stanzas, run `debian/add-vendored-copyright-overrides` to automatically update `debian/source/lintian-overrides`:

```none
$ debian/add-vendored-copyright-overrides
```

### Updating debian/copyright

All the new `vendor` files must be added to `debian/copyright`. Luckily, we can use a script which uses {term}`Lintian` ({manpage}`lintian(1)`) to generate all the missing copyright stanzas.

#### Generate the Lintian report

> [Clean up previous build artifacts](updating-rust-clean-build), build the source package using {manpage}`dpkg-buildpackage(1)`, then run Lintian, redirecting the output to somewhere convenient:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ref}`Clean up previous build artifacts <updating-rust-clean-build>`, build the source package using {manpage}`dpkg-buildpackage(1)`, then run Lintian, redirecting the output to somewhere convenient:
```

$ lintian -i -I -E --pedantic | tee <lintian_results_path>
```

#### Clean up lintian-overrides

Some of the crate stubs just happen to be covered by `debian/copyright` stanzas because of glob matching. For example, if `vendor/foo-1.0.2` was included and `vendor/foo-1.0.3` was stubbed, then a `debian/copyright` stanza matching `vendor/foo-*` will cover both. In this case, the autogenerated Lintian override for `vendor/foo-1.0.3` will trigger a Lintian warning for being mismatched.

Get a list of these unnecessary overrides:

```none
$ grep 'mismatched-override file-without-copyright-information' <lintian_results_path>
```

All of these overrides can be removed from `debian/source/lintian-overrides`. After removing the overrides, clean up old build artifacts, rebuild the source package, and re-run Lintian, just like you did in the [last step](updating-rust-lintian-command).

#### Get missing copyright stanzas

Getting the missing copyright stanzas is a tedious process. Luckily, `debian/lintian-to-copyright.sh` automates this.

Pipe the output from your call to Lintian to the script:

```none
$ cat <lintian_results_path> | debian/lintian-to-copyright.sh
```

> You may need to fill in some fields manually. [This](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/23611669/how-to-find-the-created-date-of-a-repository-project-on-github) is an easy way to find the start date of a GitHub repo.

Reviewer: I'd say it's not friendly to send the user to look for an answer on SO.
````suggestion
You may need to fill in some fields manually. To find the start date of a GitHub repo, use the GitHub API. For example:

```none
$ curl -s https://api.github.com/repos/<owner>/<repo> | jq '.created_at'
```
````
